MTM-61167 , OTLP instrumentation for microservices (#3742)
SoftwareAG/c8y-docs: content/microservice-sdk/java-bundle/java-monitoring.md

```json
{
"category": "<application-name>",
"key": "credentials.otel.exporter.otlp.headers",
"value": "Authorization=Basic MTAxNTI0OTpnbGNfZ..."
}
```

##### OTEL parameter values {#otel-parameter-values}

As an example, the parameter values required to export OTLP signals to Grafana (without using an OTLP collector instance) could be set like this:

```properties
otel.exporter.otlp.endpoint: https://otlp-gateway-prod.grafana.net/otlp
otel.exporter.otlp.protocol: http/protobuf
credentials.otel.exporter.otlp.headers: <authentication data>
```

The `otel.service.name` parameter value is automatically set with the microservice pod name at run time.

The parameter `otel.resource.attributes` gets automatically assigned these properties:

```properties
service.name: application name
service.instance.id: microservice pod name
service.namespace: tenant name
service.version: application version
```

OTEL parameters are only set in the microservice deployment if either
`otel.sdk.disabled=false` or `otel.javaagent.enabled=true`.

{{< c8y-admon-important >}}
To let parameter changes take effect, the microservice must be unsubscribed and subscribed again.
{{< /c8y-admon-important >}}

> ### Enabling auto-instrumentation {#enabling-auto-instrumentation}

Reviewer: There should be a note mentioning that enabling/disabling OTLP requires to unsubscribe/resubcribe the microservice

Author: A few lines above, there already is a note that OTLP parameters take effect only after unsubscribe/resubscribe, but I added an addtl. note here

---
weight: 55
layout: redirect
title: Monitoring support for microservices
---

{{< product-c8y-iot >}} supports the [OpenTelemetry (OTLP) framework](https://opentelemetry.io/) for exporting telemetry data (metrics, logs, and traces) from your microservice to help you analyze your application’s performance and behavior.
The Java Microservice SDK leverages the [OpenTelemetry Java agent](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/zero-code/java/agent/) which provides automatic instrumentation for many popular libraries and frameworks.

### OTLP Configuration {#otlp-configuration}
Microservices can obtain the current OTLP configuration from their individual [tenant options](https://cumulocity.com/api/core/2025/#tag/Options).
The category names for tenant options assigned to a microservice can be defined by:

- The settingsCategory defined in the microservice manifest
- The microservice’s context path

> - The microservice name

Reviewer 2: is it true that you can configure those metrics either by `name` or by `context path`? If I would to guess how it works, I would say only one of those property is used (not sure which one).

Author: For me, the tenant options area is a big flea market, but the 3 categories above are taken from https://cumulocity.com/docs/change-logs/?change-type=.change-type-api-change#cumulocity-2025-116-0-enhanced-security-for-encrypted-tenant-options 
These 3 categories are scanned for OTLP properties in this order.

Reviewer 2: ok

- Convert the name to uppercase.
- Replace all `.` and `-` characters with `_`.

For example, the `otel.sdk.disabled` tenant option is equivalent to the `OTEL_SDK_DISABLED` environment variable.

##### Encryption {#encryption}
Tenant options containing values to be encrypted, like passwords or access tokens, must be preceded with a `credentials.` prefix,
as described in the [Encryption](/microservice-sdk/general-aspects/#encryption) section.

```json
{
"category": "<application-name>",
"key": "credentials.otel.exporter.otlp.headers",
"value": "Authorization=Basic MTAxNTI0OTpnbGNfZ..."
}
```

##### OTEL parameter values {#otel-parameter-values}

As an example, the parameter values required to export OTLP signals to Grafana (without using an OTLP collector instance) could be set like this:

```properties
otel.exporter.otlp.endpoint: https://otlp-gateway-prod.grafana.net/otlp
otel.exporter.otlp.protocol: http/protobuf
credentials.otel.exporter.otlp.headers: <authentication data>
```

> The `otel.service.name` parameter value is automatically set with the microservice pod name at run time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `otel.service.name` parameter value is automatically set with the microservice pod name at runtime.
```
I think it is written as "joined"

The parameter `otel.resource.attributes` gets automatically assigned these properties:

```properties
service.name: application name
service.instance.id: microservice pod name
service.namespace: tenant name
service.version: application version
```

OTEL parameters are only set in the microservice deployment if either
`otel.sdk.disabled=false` or `otel.javaagent.enabled=true`.

{{< c8y-admon-important >}}
To let parameter changes take effect, the microservice must be unsubscribed and subscribed again.
{{< /c8y-admon-important >}}

### Enabling auto-instrumentation {#enabling-auto-instrumentation}
Whether the microservice application gets instrumented by the OpenTelemetry Java agent is controlled

> with the parameter `otel.javaagent.enabled`. Setting it to `true` enables the instrumentation:

Reviewer 2: rephrased by copilot
```suggestion
The instrumentation of the microservice application by the OpenTelemetry Java agent is controlled by the `otel.javaagent.enabled` parameter. Setting this parameter to `true` enables instrumentation.
```

However, it is possible to skip this step and to create the image without the Java agent. The `otelJavaAgentInclude` 
configuration element must be set to `false` in the Maven `pom.xml` file in this case:

```xml
            <plugin>
                <groupId>com.nsn.cumulocity.clients-java</groupId>
                <artifactId>microservice-package-maven-plugin</artifactId>
                <version>${c8y.version}</version>
                <executions>
                    <execution>
                        <id>package</id>
                        <phase>package</phase>
                        <goals>
                            <goal>package</goal>
                        </goals>
                        <configuration>
                            ...
                            <otelJavaAgentInclude>false</otelJavaAgentInclude>
                            ...
                        </configuration>
                    </execution>
                </executions>
            </plugin>
```

{{< c8y-admon-important >}}
If the Java agent JAR file is not contained in the microservice image 

> and `otel.javaagent.enabled` is set to `true`, then the microservice start will fail.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and `otel.javaagent.enabled` is set to `true`, then the microservice will fail to start.
```
Might be usefull to write here an example of error message or log thrown by the microservice.

Author: Error message snippet added. Suggestion committed.

{{< /c8y-admon-important >}}

### Manual instrumentation {#manual-instrumentation}
In addition to automatic instrumentation, microservices can be manually instrumented.

The Java agent creates the GlobalOpenTelemetry object which can be used as a starting point to create
individual Tracer or Meter objects for [custom instrumentation](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/zero-code/java/agent/api/).

Java code example:
```java
import io.opentelemetry.api.GlobalOpenTelemetry;
import io.opentelemetry.api.metrics.Meter;

Meter meter = GlobalOpenTelemetry.getMeter("application");
```

> A basic example for this use case can be found in the [OpenTelemetry GitHub repository](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-examples/tree/main/javaagent/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/example/javagent).

Reviewer 2: I think it would be nice to add one such example inside our cumulocity-examples repository. Full running microservice instrumentalled with opentelemetry. Examples from their repository for sure needs some adjustments to run inside Cumulocity.

We can have a separate task for this.

Author: Good idea! I sent a corresponding email to Martin and to you.
